THERE ARE SOME
GREAT QUESTIONS
THAT HAVE INTRIGUED
AND HAUNTED US
SINCE THE DAWN
OF HUMANITY.
WHAT IS
OUT THERE?
HOW DID WE
GET HERE?
WHAT IS THE
WORLD MADE OF?
THE STORY OF OUR SEARCH
TO ANSWER THESE QUESTIONS
IS THE STORY
OF SCIENCE.
OF ALL HUMAN ENDEAVORS,
SCIENCE HAS HAD
THE GREATEST IMPACT
ON OUR LIVES...
ON HOW WE SEE THE WORLD,
ON HOW WE SEE OURSELVES.
ITS IDEAS, ITS ACHIEVEMENTS,
ITS RESULTS ARE ALL AROUND US.
BUT THE STORY OF SCIENCE
HAS BEEN SHAPED AS MUCH
BY WHAT'S OUTSIDE THE
LABORATORY AS INSIDE.
POWER AND PASSION,
RIVALRY AND SHEER CHANCE
HAVE ALL PLAYED
SIGNIFICANT ROLES.
THIS IS THE STORY OF HOW
HISTORY MADE SCIENCE
AND HOW SCIENCE
MADE HISTORY.
THIS TIME, PERHAPS THE
GREATEST PUZZLE OF EXISTENCE.
INSIDE EVERY ONE OF US
THERE LIES A MYSTERY.
SOMETHING CREATES
THE RICH AND INTENSE
EXPERIENCE
OF BEING ALIVE.
BUT WHAT
EXACTLY IS IT?
WHAT IS IT THAT
MAKES A LIVING THING
SO DIFFERENT FROM
A NON LIVING THING?
THE QUEST TO EXPLAIN THE
SHEER WONDER OF LIFE HAS BEEN
ONE OF THE MOST ENDURING
CHALLENGES SCIENCE HAS FACED.
THE COMPLETE ANSWER HAS
PROVED TANTALIZING AND ELUSIVE.
BUT WE HAVE COME TO UNDERSTAND
MANY OF THE SECRETS OF LIFE
BY STUDYING THE CREATURE
THAT INTERESTS US THE MOST:
OURSELVES.
ACROSS THE ANCIENT WORLD THERE
WERE LONG RUNNING ARGUMENTS
ABOUT WHAT
CONSTITUTES LIFE.
FOR 1,500 YEARS
ONE PARTICULAR VIEW
DOMINATED
WESTERN THOUGHT...
THE IDEAS OF A ROMAN
CALLED CLAUDIUS GALEN.
HIS IDEAS ABOUT LIFE
WERE SHAPED BY
ONE OF THE MOST VIOLENT
AND BLOODY SPECTACLES
PROVIDED BY THE
ROMAN EMPIRE...
FOR GALEN STARTED OUT AS
PHYSICIAN TO THE GLADIATORS.
THIS WAS OFTEN A
FIGHT TO THE DEATH.
EVEN FOR THE VICTOR SURVIVAL
WAS NOT ALWAYS GUARANTEED.
TRANSLATOR: FOR EXAMPLE,
TOMBSTONES OF GLADIATORS
HAVE SURVIVED WHICH SAY
THAT THE GLADIATOR DID NOT DIE
BECAUSE HE WAS ATTACKED BY
A LION OR KILLED BY A SWORD,
BUT BECAUSE OF
THE INCOMPETENCE
OF THE DOCTOR
WHO HAD TREATED HIM.
GALEN WAS DETERMINED TO
KEEP HIS GLADIATORS ALIVE.
HIS PREDECESSOR HAD
LOST 60 WOUNDED VICTORS.
GALEN ONLY
LOST FOUR.
BUT GALEN WASN'T JUST
INTERESTED IN PRESERVING LIFE;
HE WANTED
TO EXPLAIN IT.
TRYING TO UNDERSTAND THE
WORKINGS OF THE HUMAN BODY
AND WRITE HIS
FINDINGS DOWN
BECAME HIS LIFELONG
PASSION AND HIS LEGACY.
TRANSLATOR: THE LIVER
WAS AN IMPORTANT ORGAN
WITHIN GALEN'S
CONCEPT OF ANATOMY.
BECAUSE THE LIVER
WAS THE PLACE, HE SAID,
WHERE BLOOD
WAS FORMED.
BLOOD, HE BELIEVED,
CONTAINED WITHIN IT SPIRITS.
THE SPIRITS COME FROM THE LIVER,
THE BRAIN, AND THE HEART.
AND IT'S THESE SPIRITS THAT
WERE THE ESSENCE OF LIFE.
HE WROTE 300 BOOKS
AND PAMPHLETS EXPLAINING
ALMOST EVERYTHING ABOUT
THE BODY AND HOW IT WORKS.
HIS WORK WAS
ENCYCLOPEDIC,
BUT IT WAS ALSO
FUNDAMENTALLY FLAWED.
TRANSLATOR: GALEN BASED
HIS TEACHINGS ON EXAMPLES
DRAWN FROM ANIMAL ANATOMY,
NOT HUMAN ANATOMY.
FOR EXAMPLE, PIGS, VARIOUS
TYPES OF MONKEYS, SHEEP, GOATS,
AND IT IS EVEN SAID THAT GALEN
DISSECTED AN ELEPHANT'S HEART.
NEVERTHELESS, HIS
SYSTEM FAR SURPASSED
ANYTHING ELSE
OF THE TIME.
HE BECAME WEALTHY
AND HUGELY INFLUENTIAL.
REMARKABLY, A SET OF BELIEFS
ABOUT THE BODY LAID DOWN BY
ONE MAN IN ANCIENT ROME WENT
ON TO BECOME MEDICAL GOSPEL.
FOR MORE THAN A
THOUSAND YEARS
GALEN'S WORK PROVIDED
THE REFERENCE BOOK OF LIFE.
UNTIL DEVELOPMENTS
IN RENAISSANCE ITALY
CHANGED THE WAY
WE SEE THE WORLD.
THE DUOMO
IN FLORENCE.
IT WAS BUILT AT A TIME WHEN
THE CITY STATES OF ITALY
WERE UNDERGOING
DRAMATIC CHANGE.
THE UPHEAVALS
WOULD GO ON TO AFFECT
OUR UNDERSTANDING
OF LIFE.
ONE CHANGE IN
PARTICULAR BEGAN HERE.
AS WELL AS BUILDING ONE OF
THE ICONS OF THE RENAISSANCE,
FILIPPO BRUNELLESCHI INTRODUCED
A NEW WAY OF SEEING THE WORLD.
IT INVOLVED MATHEMATICS, AND
USING THE CATHEDRAL BUILDINGS
HE DEMONSTRATED
HOW IT WORKED.
MOVE IT UP AND DOWN UNTIL THE
TWO IMAGES MERGE TOGETHER.
HOLD THIS ONE LIKE THAT AND THEN
MOVE THE MIRROR UP AND DOWN.
BRUNELLESCHI TOOK A PAINTING
OF THE BAPTISTRY AND A MIRROR.
HE ASKED HIS FRIENDS TO LOOK
THROUGH A HOLE IN THE PICTURE
AND TRY TO LINE
UP THE REFLECTION
WITH THE BUILDING
IN FRONT OF THEM.
WHAT WAS SO NOVEL AT THE
TIME WAS THAT THE PAINTING
WAS ACTUALLY A VERY
GOOD THREE DIMENSIONAL
REPRESENTATION
OF THAT BUILDING.
THAT'S
REALLY COOL.
IT'S SO REALISTIC BECAUSE OF
HIS NOVEL APPROACH TO PAINTING.
LINES THAT IN
REALITY ARE PARALLEL
HE DREW AS CONVERGING
TO A VANISHING POINT.
THIS WAS
COUNTER INTUITIVE.
TO MANY
IT STILL IS.
BUT THIS MADE THE PAINTING
ACCURATELY REFLECT
WHAT WAS SEEN
IN REAL LIFE.
IT WAS THE START OF MODERN
PERSPECTIVE PAINTING.
IT WOULD SHAPE THE
QUEST TO UNDERSTAND LIFE
BY CREATING A NEW
DESIRE FOR REALISM.
THAT DESIRE CAN BE SEEN
CLEARLY ON THE BODIES
LOCKED AWAY IN
WINDSOR CASTLE.
WINDSOR CASTLE HOUSES
AROUND 600 SKETCHES
BY LEONARDO
DA VINCI,
INCLUDING EXQUISITE
DRAWINGS OF THE HUMAN BODY.
LEONARDO WAS OF COURSE
ONE OF THE GREATEST ARTISTS
OF THE RENAISSANCE -
WONDERFUL DRAFTSMAN.
HE HAD A VERY CONCRETE SENSE
OF THREE DIMENSIONALITY.
HE WAS ABLE TO FORM IDEAS IN HIS
HEAD OF HOW STRUCTURES WORKED,
TURN THEM AROUND IN HIS HEAD
AND GET THEM DOWN ON PAPER
WITH HIS WONDERFULLY LUCID
METHODS OF REPRESENTATION.
SEEING THE DETAIL OF THESE
DRAWINGS IS LIKE LOOKING BACK
DIRECTLY INTO THE HEART OF THE
NEW RENAISSANCE VIEW OF LIFE.
IT'S IN THESE
PEN STROKES
THAT YOU CAN SEE
SOMETHING GROUNDBREAKING.
HERE HE'S TRYING TO CUT
MUSCLES AWAY AND LIFT THEM
AWAY FROM THE POINTS
OF INSERTION AND ORIGIN
TO SHOW HOW THE BONES ARE
CONNECTED TO THE MUSCLES.
IT'S THAT SORT OF
DIAGRAMMATIC INNOVATION
WHICH IS SO
IMPRESSIVE AT THIS TIME.
NOBODY HAD MADE ANATOMICAL
DRAWINGS LIKE THIS EVER BEFORE.
NOT EVEN
APPROACHING IT.
LEONARDO'S DRAWINGS ARE
PARTICULARLY REALISTIC.
UTTERLY DIFFERENT FROM ANY
PRE RENAISSANCE DRAWINGS
OF THE BODY WHICH USED TO
BE STYLIZED OR SYMBOLIC.
THE CHANGE IN CONCEPTION OF
WHAT AN ANATOMICAL DRAWING
COULD BE, FROM THE
MEDIEVAL YEAR, IF YOU LIKE,
BEFORE LEONARDO,
IS PROFOUND.
RENAISSANCE ARTISTS
HELPED GIVE NEW IMPETUS
TO THE STUDY OF
HUMAN ANATOMY.
UNDERSTANDING WHAT'S REALLY
BENEATH THE SKIN WOULD
OPEN UP NEW AVENUES IN THE
SEARCH FOR THE SECRET OF LIFE.
ANATOMY STUDIES FLOURISHED
IN THE ITALIAN TOWN OF PADUA,
ONE OF THE GREAT CENTERS OF
LEARNING IN THE 16TH CENTURY.
IN 1594 THE UNIVERSITY BUILT
THIS ANATOMY THEATER...
THE OLDEST SURVIVING STRUCTURE
OF ITS KIND IN THE WORLD.
TRANSLATOR: THE CREATION
OF AN ANATOMY THEATER
AS A PLACE THAT COULD HOLD A
LARGE NUMBER OF SPECTATORS
CREATED FOR THE FIRST TIME A
SITUATION OF MASS PARTICIPATION.
200 STUDENTS WOULD
HAVE CRAMMED IN HERE,
AND THEY WERE NOT
CONTENT FOR THEIR
ANATOMY LESSONS
TO RELY ON ANIMALS...
THEY WANTED
TO STUDY HUMANS.
THE CORPSES WOULD
BASICALLY BE THE BODIES
OF CRIMINALS WHO
HAD BEEN EXECUTED.
WHAT'S STRIKING ABOUT
DISSECTIONS IN PADUA
WAS THAT THEY WERE DONE
IN A COMPLETELY NEW WAY.
PREVIOUSLY, ANATOMY LESSONS
HAD INVOLVED THE PROFESSOR
READING FROM GALEN'S BOOK WHILE
DEMONSTRATORS CUT UP A BODY
AND POINTED OUT THE ORGAN
THAT WAS BEING DESCRIBED.
BUT HERE IN PADUA
STUDENTS WERE ENCOURAGED
TO DESCRIBE WHAT
THEY ACTUALLY SAW
AS OPPOSED TO WHAT GALEN'S
BOOK SAID THEY SHOULD SEE.
THIS NEW STYLE OF ANATOMY
LESSON WAS A BRAZEN CHALLENGE
TO ACCEPTED
WISDOM.
IT HAD BEEN PIONEERED BY
ANDREAS VESALIUS WHO WAS
MADE PROFESSOR OF SURGERY
AND ANATOMY AGED JUST 23.
HE PUBLISHED A DETAILED
ATLAS OF THE HUMAN BODY
- A NEW BOOK OF LIFE.
AS A RESULT OF MAKING
HIS OWN CAREFUL
OBSERVATIONS OF THE BODY,
VESALIUS CORRECTED
MISTAKE AFTER MISTAKE
IN ORTHODOX BELIEFS.
TRANSLATOR: IN PARTICULAR
THE ANATOMY OF THE LIVER,
THE ANATOMY OF THE HEART,
AND THE ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN.
IN THESE THREE AREAS PRECISE
ANATOMICAL KNOWLEDGE
ALLOWED ONE TO
UNDERSTAND THE FUNCTION
OF THESE THREE ORGANS IN
A NEW AND DIFFERENT WAY.
BUT VESALIUS DID MORE
THAN SIMPLY CORRECT
GALEN'S
STRUCTURAL ERRORS.
WHAT IS SO SPECIAL ABOUT
VESALIUS' WORK IS HIS APPROACH.
HE CAREFULLY
OBSERVED,
STRIPPING AWAY
LAYER AFTER LAYER.
THIS WOULD START
WESTERN MEDICAL SCIENCE
ON A DISTINCT AND
POWERFUL COURSE.
FROM NOW ON THE ESSENCE
OF LIFE WOULD BE SOUGHT
BY LOOKING DEEPER AND
DEEPER INTO THE BODY.
AND FOR MOST OF THAT
QUEST THE SECRET OF LIFE
WOULD REMAIN TANTALIZINGLY
JUST OUT OF REACH.
ENGLAND.
A THOUSAND MILES FROM
RENAISSANCE ITALY.
STRUGGLING WITH
RELIGIOUS DIVISIONS
AND POLITICAL
UPHEAVAL.
17TH CENTURY ENGLAND
WAS HEADING FOR CIVIL WAR.
THERE WAS TENSION BETWEEN
THE OLD AND THE NEW...
A CONFLICT EMBODIED
IN THE INQUISITIVE MIND
OF A PHYSICIAN
WORKING HERE
AT ST. BARTHOLOMEW'S
HOSPITAL IN LONDON.
WILLIAM HARVEY WAS IN MANY
RESPECTS A TRADITIONALIST.
BUT HE STARTED TO INVESTIGATE
HOW THE BODY WORKS.
THIS WOULD FORCE
HIM TO CHALLENGE
AND EVENTUALLY
OVERTURN ORTHODOX VIEWS.
WHEREAS VESALIUS HAD
JUST OBSERVED STRUCTURE,
HARVEY INVESTIGATED
FUNCTION.
HARVEY QUESTIONED THE
WIDELY ACCEPTED BELIEFS
THAT BLOOD IS
MADE BY THE LIVER
AND CONSUMED BY
THE REST OF THE BODY.
ONE OF HIS MOST FAMOUS
EXPERIMENTS WAS TO CALCULATE
THE VOLUME OF BLOOD THAT
PASSES THROUGH THE HEART.
WE'VE GOT SOME PIG HEARTS
HERE AND I'M GOING TO
FILL UP THE PIG
HEART WITH BLOOD.
I'M GOING TO POUR INTO THE
VENTRICLES HERE - A BIT LEAKY.
SO HERE WE HAVE ONE
"HEARTFUL" OF BLOOD.
AND WE'RE NOW GOING TO
WEIGH THIS ON THE BALANCE
AND IT'S APPROXIMATELY
JUST OVER FOUR OUNCES.
HARVEY CALCULATED THE
NUMBER OF HEARTBEATS
IN A HALF
HOUR PERIOD.
HE THEN MULTIPLIED THIS
BY THE AMOUNT OF BLOOD
IN ONE CARDIAC
"EJECTION", IF YOU LIKE,
AND CAME UP WITH A
STAGGERING FIGURE.
HARVEY'S FIGURES SHOW
THAT THE HEART CAN PROPEL
AN ASTONISHING 4,000 LITERS
OF BLOOD EVERY SINGLE DAY.
THAT'S AN AWFUL
LOT OF BLOOD.
NOW IF ACCEPTED WISDOM WAS
CORRECT, THEN THE BODY WAS
MAKING AND USING UP THIS
MUCH BLOOD EVERY 24 HOURS.
THE AMOUNT OF BLOOD WAS
VASTLY IN EXCESS OF THE AMOUNT
THAT THE LIVER COULD
POSSIBLY PRODUCE DURING A DAY.
HARVEY'S EXPERIMENTS
LED HIM TO ONE CONCLUSION:
BLOOD MUST CIRCULATE
AROUND THE BODY.
THE HEART WAS NO LONGER
JUST A MYSTERIOUS ORGAN
THAT INFUSES BLOOD
WITH THE ESSENCE OF LIFE.
IT WAS NOW
MORE LIKE A PUMP.
HE WAS REALLY PUTTING
FORWARD A VERY RADICAL IDEA.
IT'S A VERY COURAGEOUS
THING TO DO TO OVERTURN
THE PREVAILING INTELLECTUAL
ETHOS ON ANYTHING
AND I THINK HARVEY
WAS A VERY BRAVE MAN.
HARVEY'S WORK OPENED THE DOOR
TO A NEW UNDERSTANDING OF LIFE.
IT PROMISED A LESS SPIRITUAL,
MORE PHYSICAL CONCEPT
OF HOW THE
BODY WORKS.
THE CHANGE WAS
BORN OUT OF:
THE REALISM OF
PERSPECTIVE PAINTING...
A NEW OBSERVATIONAL
SCHOOL OF ANATOMY...
AND HARVEY'S
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH.
THE STAGE WAS
NOW SET FOR A MORE
MATERIALISTIC
APPROACH TO THE BODY.
AND TO LIFE.
THIS TOWN CLOCK NEAR PADUA
WAS BUILT IN THE 17TH CENTURY.
A TIME WHEN MECHANICS
WAS HELPING TO EXPLAIN
THE WORLD
AROUND US.
MEN LIKE GALILEO AND NEWTON
WERE OFFERING A COMPLETELY
NEW VIEW OF THE COSMOS BASED
ON MATHEMATICS AND PHYSICS.
ITS INTERNAL WORKINGS WERE
LIKENED TO THOSE OF A CLOCK.
COGS, WEIGHTS, PULLEYS
- SIMPLE COMPONENTS
THAT TOGETHER MAKE
A COMPLEX MACHINE.
PEOPLE BEGAN TO WONDER IF
THERE WERE THINGS IN NATURE
THAT WERE ALSO DRIVEN
BY HIDDEN CLOCKWORK.
WAS THE SAME
TRUE OF US?
WERE WE JUST
MECHANICAL BEINGS?
AN ITALIAN MATHEMATICIAN
CALLED GIOVANNI BORELLI
TOOK THE RIGOROUS ANALYTICAL
METHODS FROM MECHANICS
AND APPLIED THEM
TO THE STUDY OF LIFE.
HE WOULD HOLD HIS ARM OUT
AND THEN PUT AS MUCH WEIGHT
AS POSSIBLE ON BEFORE HE
COULDN'T HOLD IT ANYMORE.
IF I BRING MY ARM INTO MY
BODY IT'S A LOT EASIER.
IN HIS ATTEMPT TO
UNDERSTAND THE BODY,
BORELLI BROKE IT DOWN
INTO VERY SIMPLE CONCEPTS.
HERE'S AN EXAMPLE
OF A BORELLI ARM.
HERE'S THE WRIST.
AND IF WE THINK OF THESE
ROPES HERE AS MUSCLES,
IF WE SHORTEN THE ROPES LIKE
YOU CONTRACT YOUR MUSCLES,
WE CAN MOVE
THE JOINT.
HE DEDUCED THAT THE MAIN
POINT OF OUR MUSCLES
IS LESS ABOUT STRENGTH
AND MORE ABOUT MOVEMENT.
BECAUSE IT'S ATTACHED
VERY CLOSE TO THE JOINT
JUST A SMALL MOVEMENT
IN THE MUSCLE,
A SMALL CONTRACTION,
CREATES A HUGE MOTION.
IT WAS A MAJOR STEP
TOWARDS EXPLAINING
HOW OUR BODIES
REALLY WORK.
HAVING BROKEN IT DOWN,
BORELLI COULD NOW
PUT THE BODY BACK
TOGETHER AGAIN.
SO HERE'S
BORELLI'S MAN.
THIS IS THE HUMAN BODY AS
BORELLI WOULD HAVE SEEN IT.
EACH OF THESE WOODEN
SEGMENTS IS A BONE
AND EACH OF THESE ROPES
REPRESENTS THE MUSCLES
AND IT'S THE TENSIONING OF
THESE ROPES, OR THE MUSCLES,
WHICH ALLOWS YOU
TO STAND STRAIGHT UP.
AND BORELLI DIDN'T
JUST LOOK AT MOVEMENT,
HE ANALYZED THE
INTERNAL ORGANS TOO...
CALCULATING THE
VOLUME OF THE LUNGS
AND THE FORCE OF
THE PUMPING HEART.
THOUGH BORELLI'S
CONCEPTS WERE VERY SIMPLE
AND BROKEN DOWN INTO
VERY SIMPLE TERMS,
ALMOST ALL OF HIS
POSTULATES STILL HOLD.
THAT GOES FROM THE JOINT
LEVEL TO THE MUSCLE
AND EVEN THE
MUSCLE FIBER LEVEL -
ALL OF HIS POSTULATES
ARE STILL VALID TODAY.
WITH HIS INSIGHTS AND
MATHEMATICAL DESCRIPTIONS
OF THE BODY, BORELLI
WAS ABLE TO DESCRIBE
MANY OF THE THINGS
THAT THE BODY CAN DO.
HE SAW THE BODY AS A MACHINE -
A VERY SOPHISTICATED MACHINE,
BUT A MACHINE
NONETHELESS.
BORELLI INSPIRED A NEW
SCIENCE OF BIOMECHANICS.
THE LIVING BODY BROKEN
DOWN INTO COMPONENT PARTS.
LIFE REDUCED TO
SIMPLE PHYSICAL LAWS.
BUT FOR THOSE WHO BELIEVED
IN THE MECHANICAL BODY
THERE WAS A
SIGNIFICANT PROBLEM.
THIS CLOCK NEEDS TO BE
WOUND UP EVERY 47 HOURS
OTHERWISE IT
SIMPLY STOPS.
WHAT WAS THE EQUIVALENT
IN THE HUMAN BODY?
WHAT WAS THE LIFE
FORCE THAT DRIVES US?
THE QUESTION REKINDLED AN
ANCIENT IDEA KNOWN AS VITALISM.
THE IDEA THAT THERE WAS
SOMETHING MORE TO LIFE
THAN A
PHYSICAL BODY.
SOMETHING
INTANGIBLE...
IN THE 18TH CENTURY MANY
BELIEVED THAT EXTRA SOMETHING
MIGHT LIE IN THE VERY
LATEST SCIENTIFIC MARVEL...
ELECTRICITY.
NO ONE KNEW
QUITE WHAT IT WAS.
NO ONE KNEW QUITE
WHERE IT CAME FROM.
AND IN 1771 A RETIRING
DOCTOR CALLED LUIGI GALVANI
MADE ONE OF THE MOST
PERPLEXING AND IMPORTANT
DISCOVERIES OF
THE CENTURY.
HE'D FOUND THAT
TOUCHING FROGS LEGS
WITH DIFFERENT METALS
WOULD MAKE THEM TWITCH.
GALVANI WAS CONVINCED
THAT ELECTRICITY WAS
BEING GENERATED FROM
WITHIN THE TISSUE OF THE FROG.
HE CLAIMED TO HAVE
DISCOVERED THE VITAL FORCE,
THE SECRET TO WHAT
MAKES TISSUE ALIVE.
WAS THIS EVIDENCE OF A LINK
BETWEEN MATTER AND SPIRIT?
COULD THIS ANIMAL ELECTRICITY
BE THE SPARK OF LIFE?
ACROSS EUROPE, EMINENT
RESEARCHERS SET OUT TO FIND OUT.
ONE SCIENTIST WHO
TOOK IT TO EXTREMES
WAS THE GERMAN SCHOLAR
ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT.
NERVE SPECIALIST,
DR. DAVID LIEBETANZ,
WORKS AT HUMBOLDT'S OLD
UNIVERSITY IN GOTTINGEN.
HE IS PREPARED TO TRY SOME
SIMILAR SELF EXPERIMENTATION.
TRANSLATOR: TO BEGIN WITH
I'VE PLACED TWO ELECTRODES
ON A GROUP
OF MUSCLES,
AND NOW I WILL PASS
SOME CURRENT THROUGH IT.
VON HUMBOLDT'S GOAL WAS
TO ESTABLISH WHETHER
ANIMAL ELECTRICITY
WAS THE LIFE FORCE
THAT ANIMATED
THE HUMAN MACHINE.
TRANSLATOR: YOU CAN
SEE HOW THE HAND AND
PARTICULARLY THE TWO FINGERS
- I CAN'T OPEN THEM ANYMORE.
I CAN'T STRETCH MY
FINGERS ANYMORE.
DAVID'S MUSCLES ARE
CONTRACTING DUE TO
CAREFULLY CONTROLLED
ELECTRIC SHOCKS.
IN VON HUMBOLDT'S TIME THIS
WAS ALL A LOT MORE RUDIMENTARY.
TRANSLATOR: HE TRIED TO
TRIGGER BIG MOVEMENTS
IN HIS BACK MUSCLES BY
APPLYING ELECTRICITY
WHICH ALSO ULTIMATELY LED
TO SELF INDUCED BURNS,
BIG WOUNDS WHICH
THEN BECAME INFLAMED.
EVEN THIS
DIDN'T STOP HIM.
HE ALSO TRIED TO
USE THESE WOUNDS
TO FEED THE ELECTRICITY
DIRECTLY INTO THE MUSCLES.
SO THESE WERE DEFINITELY LIFE
THREATENING EXPERIMENTS.
TO RECAPTURE SOME OF
THE MADNESS AND NOVELTY
OF HIS ELECTRICAL
WORK 200 YEARS AGO,
DAVID HAS DEVISED
AN EXPERIMENT
ADAPTING HIS MACHINE
TO RESPOND TO MUSIC.
♪
VON HUMBOLDT PERFORMED 4,000
EXPERIMENTS WITH ELECTRICITY.
TRANSLATOR: BLIMEY,
THAT WAS EXHAUSTING.
I'M GLAD
THAT'S OVER.
IT QUICKLY LED TO PEOPLE
BELIEVING YOU COULD ANIMATE
NOT JUST MUSCLES BUT
ALSO WHOLE ANIMALS,
OR EVEN
HUMAN BEINGS,
BY APPLYING ELECTRICITY
TO THE BODY.
OTHER EXPERIMENTERS
AGREED.
THIS SEEMED TO BE
EVIDENCE OF A LINK
BETWEEN MATTER
AND SPIRIT.
THEY TRIED TO USE ELECTRICITY
TO BRING THE DEAD BACK TO LIFE
AND FAILED.
HOWEVER HARD THEY TRIED,
THEY COULDN'T IMPART LIFE
TO FLESH
AND BLOOD.
THE PROMISE OF ANIMAL
ELECTRICITY PROVED TO BE
A FALSE DAWN
FOR VITALISTS.
THE SEARCH FOR
THE SECRET OF LIFE
WOULD NEED A WHOLE
NEW APPROACH TO SCIENCE.
19TH CENTURY BERLIN.
CAPITAL OF A
NATION ON THE RISE.
THE PRUSSIAN ESTABLISHMENT
BUILT GRAND MONUMENTS
AND GREAT ARMIES.
IT INVESTED IN INDUSTRY
AND TECHNOLOGY.
PRUSSIAN ASPIRATIONS SPAWNED
INNOVATIVE WORKING METHODS.
UNIVERSITY STUDENTS, FOR
EXAMPLE, NOW COLLABORATED
WITH THEIR PROFESSORS
ON NEW RESEARCH.
THIS WAS WHEN
THE MODERN IDEA
OF THE RESEARCH
LABORATORY WAS BORN.
INSTEAD OF LONE GENIUSES THERE
WOULD BE TEAMS OF SCIENTISTS
TACKLING PROBLEMS,
DOING EXPERIMENTS,
BEING PEER
REVIEWED.
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
WOULD NOW BE ORGANIZED,
SYSTEMIZED,
LEGITIMIZED.
ALL THIS WOULD HAVE A DIRECT
EFFECT ON THE FUTURE OF BIOLOGY
AND FUNDAMENTALLY ALTER
OUR UNDERSTANDING OF LIFE.
THIS NEW PRUSSIAN SYSTEM
EXPLOITED A TECHNOLOGY
THAT HAD BEEN INVENTED
200 YEARS PREVIOUSLY...
THE MICROSCOPE.
ONE OF THE FIRST TO USE
IT HAD BEEN ROBERT HOOKE
IN THE 17TH
CENTURY.
HOOKE PUBLISHED A BOOK
FULL OF THE DRAWINGS
OF WHAT HE MANAGED TO SEE
LOOKING DOWN THE MICROSCOPE.
HIS BOOK, MICROGRAPHIA,
HAD REVEALED A WORLD
NO ONE HAD
SEEN BEFORE.
IT WAS STRANGE
AND BEAUTIFUL.
THE MICROSCOPE HAD REVEALED
THE INTRICATE STRUCTURE
OF PLANTS, SNOWFLAKES,
AND NATURAL FIBERS.
INSECTS WITH BODY
PARTS ON A SCALE
NO ONE HAD
IMAGINED POSSIBLE.
IT WAS A WORLD OF
UNPRECEDENTED DETAIL.
ONE PICTURE OF
A SLICE OF CORK
IS PERHAPS NOT THE
MOST INTERESTING
BUT IT IS IN FACT
THE MOST IMPORTANT...
BECAUSE THIS IS THE
FIRST DRAWING OF A CELL.
HE PICKED A VERY GOOD
MATERIAL TO LOOK AT...
CORK, BECAUSE YOU
CAN REALLY CLEARLY SEE
THE OUTLINE
OF THE CELLS.
AND THIS WAS THE FIRST
RECORDED DESCRIPTION
OF THESE STRUCTURES
AND HE NAMED THEM "CELLS"
BECAUSE THEY LOOKED
LIKE LITTLE ROOMS.
AT THE TIME NO ONE REALIZED
THE TRUE SIGNIFICANCE
OF WHAT
HE HAD SEEN.
AND THE IDEA OF THE CELL
WOULD LANGUISH IN OBSCURITY
FOR 200 YEARS.
THE CELL FINALLY RESURFACED
IN THE MID 19TH CENTURY
IN THE RESEARCH
LABORATORIES OF PRUSSIA.
THERE WAS NOW
A MICROSCOPE,
A WAY OF DELVING DEEPER INTO
LIFE, ON EVERY LAB BENCH.
AND RESEARCHERS NOW
SAW CELLS NOT JUST IN CORK
BUT IN OTHER
PLANTS...
AND IN ANIMALS.
THEIR BASIC FINDING WAS THAT
ALL LIFE IS MADE UP OF CELLS.
IT WAS VERY CONTROVERSIAL
AT THE TIME OF ITS DISCOVERY.
PEOPLE DIDN'T REALLY
UNDERSTAND WHAT WAS LIFE
AND WHAT
WASN'T LIFE.
AND THE REVELATIONS ABOUT
THE CELL HAD ONLY JUST BEGUN.
A LITTLE KNOWN GERMAN
CALLED ROBERT REMAK
STUDIED FROG SPAWN AND
RECORDED A REMARKABLE PROCESS.
HE COULD OBSERVE THAT CELLS
WERE COMING FROM EACH OTHER
BECAUSE HE COULD SEE THEM,
HE COULD WATCH THEM,
HE COULD OBSERVE
THEM DIVIDING.
SEEN IN TIME LAPSE, AT
FIRST THE CELLS ARE SIMPLY
REPLICATING
AND DIVIDING.
THEN SLOWLY THE CELLS
START TO SPECIALIZE
AND FORM THE DIFFERENT BODY
PARTS OF THE JUVENILE FROG.
THIS WAS THE FIRST
OBSERVATION THAT
REALLY SHOWED YOU THAT
ALL THE CELLS OF THE BODY
THROUGH THIS
DIVISION PROCESS
GIVE RISE TO EVERY
OTHER CELL IN THE BODY.
AND IT ISN'T JUST THE HUMBLE
TADPOLE THAT GROWS LIKE THIS.
THE MICROSCOPE HAD REVEALED
TWO FUNDAMENTAL RULES OF LIFE.
EVERY LIVING THING ON THE
PLANET IS MADE OF CELLS
AND CELLS ONLY COME
FROM OTHER CELLS.
UNDERSTAND THE CELL AND YOU'D
UNDERSTAND WHAT LIFE WAS.
EXCEPT IT WASN'T
AS EASY AS ALL THAT.
BECAUSE EVEN WITH
THE BEST MICROSCOPES,
THIS IS ALL
THEY COULD SEE...
A NUCLEUS IN A
TRANSLUCENT MUSH.
THE SECRET OF LIFE, ONCE AGAIN,
HAD SLIPPED OUT OF REACH.
IF BIOLOGISTS WERE TO
MAKE FURTHER PROGRESS
THEY HAD TO FIND A WAY TO
MAKE THE INVISIBLE VISIBLE.
IN THE 1850'S SYNTHETIC
DYES BURST ONTO THE SCENE
CREATING A WHOLE
NEW PALLET.
FASHION DROVE
THE DEMAND.
PAINTING AND THE ARTS
WERE ALSO REVITALIZED.
ARTIFICIAL COLORS WERE
MADE BY GERMAN CHEMISTS
ON AN INDUSTRIAL
SCALE...
AND THEY TRANSFORMED
THE SEARCH FOR LIFE.
THE DIFFERENT CHEMICALS
USED MEANT THAT DIFFERENT
COLORED DYES WERE ABLE TO STAIN
DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE CELL.
THERE WERE STAINS THAT
WILL LABEL YOUR NUCLEI
AND THERE ARE STAINS THAT WILL
LABEL THE OUTSIDE OF THE CELL.
THEY WERE DISCOVERING
THINGS BECAUSE
THEY WERE THE FIRST
PEOPLE TO BE ABLE TO SEE.
THEY FOUND
INTERNAL MEMBRANES,
PROTEIN STRUCTURES
AND ENERGY STORES.
BUT WHAT STOOD
OUT IN PARTICULAR -
INSIDE THE NUCLEUS
WERE THE CHROMOSOMES.
CHROMOSOMES, MEANING
"COLORED BODIES",
WERE NAMED AFTER THE DYES
THAT HELPED REVEAL THEM.
AND THEY CLEARLY
PLAYED A CRUCIAL ROLE
WHEN A CELL DIVIDES
AND REPLICATES.
IT SEEMED THIS WAS WHERE
THE SECRET OF LIFE MUST LIE.
THIS NEW UNIT OF LIFE, THE
CHROMOSOME, HAD EMERGED
FROM THE RISE OF GERMANY
AS A WORLD POWER...
ITS CREATION OF
RESEARCH LABORATORIES...
AND ITS INVESTMENT IN THE
CHEMICAL DYE INDUSTRY.
THESE FACTORS
HAD BROUGHT US
TANTALIZINGLY CLOSE TO A
NEW UNDERSTANDING OF LIFE.
BUT IT SEEMS AS IF SCIENCE
NEVER SOLVES ONE PROBLEM
WITHOUT CREATING
SEVERAL MORE.
HAVING IDENTIFIED
THE CHROMOSOMES
IT WAS CLEAR THAT
RESEARCHERS WOULD NEED TO
FIND OUT HOW THEY WORKED,
HOW THEY REPLICATED...
AND THAT WOULD
NOT BE EASY.
THE STORY OF SCIENCE HAS NEVER
BEEN A STRAIGHTFORWARD ONE.
THE NEXT STAGE SEEMS TO HAVE
LITTLE TO DO WITH BIOLOGY.
IT INVOLVED A MORAL
CRISIS IN A SECRETIVE TOWN.
IT WAS A TOWN
WITH NO NAME.
IT DID NOT
APPEAR ON MAPS,
BUT IT CONSUMED MORE
ELECTRICITY THAN NEW YORK.
OAK RIDGE, TENNESSEE
WAS PART OF THE BIGGEST
SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL
PROJECT IN HISTORY:
THE MANHATTAN
PROJECT.
ITS AIM: TO CREATE
A NUCLEAR BOMB.
THE REACTORS HERE IN OAK
RIDGE PRODUCED THE URANIUM
FOR THE BOMB
DROPPED ON HIROSHIMA.
THE BOMB CONTAINED 64
KILOS OF URANIUM OF WHICH
ONLY ABOUT HALF A GRAM WAS
TURNED INTO PURE ENERGY.
BUT THIS
WAS ENOUGH.
THERE HAVE BEEN FEW
MORE SIGNIFICANT MOMENTS
FOR SCIENCE
THAN THIS...
IT CHANGED
SO MUCH.
THE CREATION OF AN
INSTRUMENT OF DEATH
WOULD EVEN IMPACT ON
THE SCIENCE OF LIFE.
MANY OF THE SCIENTISTS
WHO'D HELPED MAKE THE BOMB
NOW WANTED
OUT OF PHYSICS.
IT WAS TAINTED.
THEY WANTED SOMETHING
MORE LIFE AFFIRMING.
AND MANY OF THEM
FOUND IT IN BIOLOGY.
AFTER THE WAR A PHYSICIST
CALLED MAURICE WILKINS
CAME HERE TO KING'S
COLLEGE LONDON
TO STUDY THE
ENIGMATIC CHROMOSOME.
WHAT HE STARTED HERE
WOULD LEAD TO ONE OF THE
GREAT SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERIES
OF THE 20TH CENTURY
AND TRANSFORM OUR
UNDERSTANDING OF LIFE.
IT BEGAN INNOCUOUSLY ENOUGH
WHEN HE STARTED TO INVESTIGATE
ONE OF THE CHEMICALS
FOUND INSIDE CHROMOSOMES.
I'M GOING TO ATTEMPT TO EXTRACT
SOME DNA FROM MY OWN CELLS.
ALL IT TAKES IS A
LITTLE SALT WATER.
JUST GOING TO
POUR THIS INTO HERE...
SOME WASHING
UP LIQUID.
DO THIS FOR
SEVERAL SECONDS...
AND A SPLASH OF
ICE COLD ALCOHOL.
I CAN SEE THESE FIBERS
NOW SO I'M ACTUALLY
LOOKING AT MY DNA
FOR THE FIRST TIME.
I'VE NEVER DONE
THIS BEFORE.
THERE'S AN EXTRAORDINARILY
LONG FIBER THERE.
TODAY, DNA IS OFTEN
CALLED THE SECRET OF LIFE.
BUT IS IT REALLY?
BACK IN THE 1950'S THEY
REALIZED THAT DNA WAS SPECIAL
THEY JUST DIDN'T KNOW
AN AWFUL LOT ABOUT IT.
MAURICE WILKINS REALIZED
THAT HE'D BE ABLE TO BRING
HIS PHYSICIST TECHNIQUES
TO BEAR ON MATERIAL LIKE THIS
AND HOPEFULLY ELUCIDATE THE
STRUCTURE OF THE MOLECULE
AND FROM THAT
LEARN ITS FUNCTION.
HIS WEAPON OF CHOICE
WAS A TECHNIQUE CALLED
"X-RAY DIFFRACTION".
X-RAYS FIRED AT THE DNA HIT THE
MOLECULE AND GET SCATTERED.
THE PATTERN OF THE
SCATTERING CAN BE USED
TO CALCULATE THE
SHAPE OF THE MOLECULE.
THIS ESSENTIALLY
IS A PHOTOGRAPH
OF A MOLECULE'S
SHADOW.
JOINING WILKINS' DEPARTMENT
WAS ONE OF THE BEST
X-RAY DIFFRACTION
EXPERTS AROUND:
ROSALIND FRANKLIN.
IN HERE IS THE ORIGINAL
SAMPLE OF DNA THAT SHE USED.
AND IN HER HANDWRITING
IT REFERS TO THE SAMPLE
AND WHERE IT
CAME FROM.
YOU CAN DRAW
FIBERS OF THE DNA
AND THIS HERE STILL IS
AN INTACT DRAWN FIBER
IN A LITTLE RIG MADE
OUT OF A PAPER CLIP.
SHE KNEW THAT SHE WAS TAKING
THE PHOTOGRAPHS AND THE DATA
THAT WOULD EVENTUALLY
PROVE THE STRUCTURE.
BUT SHE HAD
COMPETITION.
IN CAMBRIDGE A DIFFERENT
TEAM WAS ALSO RACING
TO MAKE
SENSE OF DNA.
FRANCIS CRICK, ANOTHER
FORMER PHYSICIST,
AND JAMES WATSON,
WERE BUILDING MODELS.
IN APRIL 1953
THEY PUBLISHED...
THE FAMOUS
DOUBLE HELIX.
THEY GOT THE GLORY, BUT
THEIR MODEL WAS INSPIRED
BY ONE OF FRANKLIN'S
PHOTOGRAPHS
SHOWN TO WATSON WITHOUT
FRANKLIN'S KNOWLEDGE.
HERE IS THE FAMOUS
PHOTOGRAPH, #51.
IT WAS WHEN JIM WATSON SAW
THIS PARTICULAR PHOTOGRAPH
AND HE REALIZED HOW CLEAR
THE EVIDENCE WAS FOR A HELIX
THAT THEY WERE ABLE
TO COMPLETE THE MODEL
THAT TURNED OUT
TO BE CORRECT.
THE SECRET OF DNA HAD
BEEN UNLOCKED BY PHYSICS.
IT WAS THIS HELICAL SHAPE -
TWO STRANDS CLOSELY ENTWINED
- WHICH NEATLY EXPLAINED
HOW A CELL DIVIDES,
HOW IT REPLICATES,
AND UNTIL NOW
THAT HAD BEEN ONE OF
BIOLOGY'S GREATEST MYSTERIES.
DNA SOON BECAME THE FOUNDATION
OF A NEW SCIENCE OF LIFE.
BUT IS IT THE
SECRET OF LIFE?
IN THE LAST 50 YEARS WE'VE
UNCOVERED A VAST AMOUNT
OF OUR DNA - WHAT IT'S MADE
UP OF, HOW IT FUNCTIONS -
AND WE CAN EVEN
CREATE DNA IN THE LAB.
BUT WE'VE ALSO
DISCOVERED THAT DNA
IS NOT ENOUGH
TO CREATE LIFE.
DNA IS SIMPLY A SET
OF INSTRUCTIONS
AND IT NEEDS TO BE READ
BY OTHER MOLECULES.
AND DNA CAN EVEN BE MODIFIED BY
OTHER PARTS OF THE SAME CELL.
THIS CIRCULAR FEEDBACK
MEANS LIFE CANNOT BE
PINNED DOWN TO
ONE COMPONENT.
IN SHORT, TO
CREATE LIFE
YOU ABSOLUTELY
NEED THE WHOLE CELL.
THE PROCESS OF DELVING
EVER DEEPER INTO THE BODY
HAS DISCOVERED
SO MUCH.
IT HAS CREATED MODERN
BIOLOGY, BUT IT HAS ALSO
SHOWN THAT THE SECRET
OF LIFE DOES NOT LIE
IN SIMPLICITY, IN ANY ONE
CHEMICAL OR PROCESS.
THE ESSENCE OF LIFE
MUST LIE IN COMPLEXITY.
ONE DAY WE PROBABLY
WILL UNDERSTAND
HOW ALL THE COMPONENTS
IN THE CELL COMBINE,
HOW THEY
CREATE LIFE.
BUT EVEN THEN, THAT
WOULD BE PRIMITIVE.
ONLY ONE CELL...
IT IS A MASSIVE STEP FROM
THAT TO THE COMBINATION OF
BILLIONS OF CELLS WHICH
MAKE UP EACH OF OUR BODIES.
WE HAVE GONE ON AN
ENORMOUS JOURNEY
TO GET WHERE
WE ARE TODAY.
BUT WHEN IT COMES
TO UNDERSTANDING
THE COMPLEXITY OF LIFE WE
STILL HAVE A HUGE WAY TO GO.
ONCE AGAIN, THE
ENIGMATIC SECRET OF LIFE
HAS SLIPPED AWAY.